So how do you decide go whether
to use factor analysis or PCA?
Factor analysis is best used when you're
trying to understand the underlying
factor or
factors from a common set of variables.
With factor analysis, because you're
estimating the underlying cause behind
the variables,
it becomes easier to conceptualize.
When you have a goal to try to explain
the correlations between the variables,
factor analysis works best.
For example, it works well
with social science analyses,
such as attitudinal studies or
surveys where you're trying to determine
the underlying basis for the responses.
So that's when you would choose factor
analysis, but when would you use PCA?
If the goal is to explain as much of
the total variance as possible, or
you want the total picture of the data,
PCA is the choice.
But as mentioned earlier,
because the component you end up with
are more of abstractions of all
of the data, those components
may not be easy to interpret or map
out to an easy to understand concept.
With PCA, the balance becomes having a
reduced set of variables that are easier
to work with and yet, being able to use
them to tell the story to the business.
That isn't necessarily easy, but
we will show how it could
work in our example exercise.
Of course, as we shall see
in the following exercise,
it doesn't have to be an all-or-none
approach to variable reduction.
It may work well to have a hybrid where
some of the variables are consolidated
into components and
the others are left alone.